# Editors(Vim)

Vim has multiple operating modes.

>enter Insert mode with `i`, 
>
>Replace mode with `R`, 
>
>Visual mode with `v`, Visual Line mode with `V`, Visual Block mode with `<C-v>` (Ctrl-V, sometimes also written `^V`)
>
>Command-line mode with `:`.

## [cheat](cheat_sheet.txt)

# Movement (Regex)

- Basic movement: `hjkl` (left, down, up, right)
- Words: `w` (next word), `b` (beginning of word), `e` (end of word)
- Lines: `0` (beginning of line), `^` (first non-blank character), `$` (end of line)
- Screen: `H` (top of screen), `M` (middle of screen), `L` (bottom of screen)
- Scroll: `Ctrl-u` (up), `Ctrl-d` (down)
- File: `gg` (beginning of file), `G` (end of file)
- Line numbers: `:{number}<CR>` or `{number}G` (line {number})
- Misc: `%` Type  %  to find a matching `)`,`]`, or `}` .
- Find: f {Character}, t{Character}, F{Character}, T{Character}
  - find/to forward/backward {character} on the current line
  - `,` / `;` for navigating matches
- Search: `/{regex}`, **`n` / `N` for navigating matches**
  - **replace :%s/object/substituion/**


# Selection

Visual modes:

- Visual: `v`
- Visual Line: `V`
- Visual Block: `Ctrl-v`

# Edits

* .
  * repeat the previous editing

- i
  - enter Insert mode
  - but for manipulating/deleting text, want to use something more than backspace
- `o` / `O` insert line below / above
- d{motion} delete {motion}
  - e.g. `dw` is delete word, `d$` is delete to end of line, `d0` is delete to beginning of line `dd` -- perfection
- c{motion} change {motion}
  - e.g. `cw` is change word
  - like `d{motion}` followed by `i`
- `x` delete character (equal do `dl`)
- `s` substitute character (equal to `xi`)
- Visual mode + manipulation

  - select text, `d` to delete it or `c` to change it
- **`u` to undo, `<C-r>` to redo**
- `y` to copy / “yank” (some other commands like **`d` also copy**)
- `p` to paste
- Lots more to learn: e.g. **`~` flips the case of a character**
- `R` typing a capital R enters replace mode until ESC is pressed
- When typing a  :  command, press CTRL-D to see possible completions.
       Press <TAB> to use one completion.

# Counts

You can combine nouns and verbs with a count, which will perform a given action a number of times.

- `3w` move 3 words forward
- `5j` move 5 lines down
- `7dw` delete 7 words

# Modifiers

You can use modifiers to change the meaning of a noun. Some modifiers are `i`, which means “inner” or “inside”, and `a`, which means “around”.

- `ci(` change the contents inside the current pair of parentheses
- `ci[` change the contents inside the current pair of square brackets
- `da'` delete a single-quoted string, including the surrounding single quotes

# Demo

Here is a broken [fizz buzz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz) implementation:

```python
def fizz_buzz(limit):
    for i in range(limit):
        if i % 3 == 0:
            print('fizz')
        if i % 5 == 0:
            print('fizz')
        if i % 3 and i % 5:
            print(i)

def main():
    fizz_buzz(10)
```

We will fix the following issues:

- Main is never called
- Starts at 0 instead of 1
- Prints “fizz” and “buzz” on separate lines for multiples of 15
- Prints “fizz” for multiples of 5
- Uses a hard-coded argument of 10 instead of taking a command-line argument



:sp  separate -> :qa quit all -> ^W : switch

k up

j down

h left 

l right

f + "c" : find the first "c" in the sentence

d + "c" delete ...

# Lesson 5 SUMMARY

1. ```vim
   :!command # executes an external command
   :!ls
   ```

2. :w FILENAME  writes the current Vim file to disk with name FILENAME.

  3.  v  motion  :w FILENAME  saves the Visually selected lines in file
      FILENAME.

  4.  :r FILENAME  retrieves disk file FILENAME and puts it below the
      cursor position.

  5.  :r !dir  reads the output of the dir command and puts it below the
      cursor position.





左右分屏如下操作：

```bash
vim -On file1 file2 ... filen
```

# Exercises

1. (Advanced) Convert XML to JSON ([example file](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/files/example-data.xml)) using Vim macros. Try to do this on your own, but you can look at the [macros](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/editors/#macros) section above if you get stuck.

*Done* [result](1.json)

